Let us briefly address a topic which you might have heard about frequently, that of a supposed possibility
of taking advantage of quantum entanglement or whatever other quantum effects to transmit at speeds
faster than light or eventually also instantly throughout the universe via wavefunction collapse of
a. correlated particles.
This is something to which many like to resort in order to explain possible telepathic or paranormal
phenomena, to see how this unfortunately is not the case, not even in principle, let us connect again
to the modern experimental set up of the kind we used for the EPR paradox and then further follow the
considerations and consequences to which it leads.
In its spin version, with Alice and Bob making measurements on the spin of the two entangled particles
flying apart, we saw that once the spin of one of the two particles is measured, the spin of the other
particle will immediately be determined.
We also saw why in quantum mechanics, at least in its standard formulation, that is considered a complete
theory.
And without hidden variables, we are not allowed to think that this correlation is predetermined.
That is, it does not arise among the particles at the instant of creation in the source, but must
be considered and understood as being determined at the time of measurement, not before.
We cannot use counterfactual reasoning whereby we imagine them as being one particle in a spin up state
and the other particle in a spin down state during flight.
While we are not looking at it, we must consider the two particles as one and the unique whole in a
superposition state of the two possibilities, and that only when the measurement takes place will one
particle assume the spin up and the other the spin down state just by pure 50 percent chance.
Therefore, while the overall momentum in its singlet state is zero, the the a. correlation of the
two particles comes into existence at the time of measurement here, a very appealing idea naturally
comes to mind.
We might use this super luminal action at a distance to send messages throughout the entire universe
at speeds faster than light, maybe even at infinite speed everywhere.
Contrary to all that relativity has told us so far, that could eventually also be a great method of
communicating with extraterrestrial civilizations, couldn't it?
So the question really is, could Bob and Ellis use this method to instantly transmit messages to each
other through out the universe?
Moreover, the two spin states of elementary particles lend themselves quite well to serving as a binary
encoding system like that in computers.
Nature did us the favor of allowing for particles having having only discrete to value spin states.
For example, one might imagine digital data in the form of ones and zeros associating to spin up the
one digit and to the spin down the zero signable.
So could we in principle use this binary spin encoding to transmit instantly, say, with Alice on Earth
and Bob on the planet around a star in the Andromeda Andromeda galaxy and which is about two million
light years away?
According to quantum mechanics, at least as we know it, in its present formulation, the clear answer
is no, not even in principle.
We cannot do this.
The point we must always be in mind is that neither Ellis nor Bob will ever be able to predict or force
the outcome of the measurement they make on the particles.
They are not allowed to intervene in the random Kwanten process, which entangle the particles at the
source, and they cannot predict or influence the measurement outcome when they receive and measure
their particles in their respective laboratories.
They are simply passive observers of a stream of random digits and have no means of projecting their
particles into a desired set of igan states.
Who decides where the spin up or spin down will appear is neither Alice nor Bob's business.
It is the exclusive competence of nature upon which we have no authority, in fact, to transmit any
sort of information would require, say, Alice, forcing with some non-random regularity the spin outcomes
onto her entangled particle in her laboratory.
Otherwise, she cannot encode any message in a binary code.
Yet this is forbidden.
She has no means by which to intervene and decide in which I can state her particle will be projected
into at the time of her measurement.
She can only make measurements and find out which spin states show up for each particle.
But she cannot predetermine the spins of the particles that she detects in her laboratory.
What they both see, Alice and Bob, is a random stream of even's produced by the radioactive or whatever
kind of entangling source.
But they will never, ever be able to predetermine the next particles state.
This prevents from the outset any possibility of encoding data according to quantum mechanics.
There is always a 50 percent chance of obtaining the up or down spin, and there is nothing you can
do about it other than passively listening to white noise.
And therefore, if they can't determine which spin value comes into being at the instant of measurement,
then they have also no means by which to transmit information.
Therefore, even if there is indeed a correlation between two particles coming into being instantly
also over long distances, it will nevertheless be impossible to use this method to send information.
For this reason, there isn't any real violation of the causal process in the relativistic sense.
It is an nonlocal causality, but in line with relativity.
If we restrict our understanding of relativistic causality to something which is about only slower than
light speed, information transmission.
At any rate, the quantum faster than light correlation must not be seen as a transmission of particles
or a force or a feed that spreads out from Earth to the Andromeda galaxy instantly, all the known particles,
forces and fees that physics deals with are known to always propagate with speeds equal or less than
the speed of light in accordance with relativity.
It is the wave function that collapses instantly and determines a. correlation.
Yet the wave function is not an electromagnetic field or a wave made of particles or force.
So what is it?
Well, nobody knows for sure.
It is just a probability wave.
We can't say more than that.
And therefore we should not extrapolate to particles of fields travelling faster than light.
Moreover, recall how in this experimental setup, which is the analog of the EPR experiment extended
to particles spins, both Alice and Bob have to ask each other about the measurement results if they
want to know the complete state of the particles complete along all the axis that X, Y, etc., because
quantum mechanics does not allow them to perform further measurements on their own particles.
Bob has to ask Alice what she obtained along with that access, and Alice has to ask Bob what outcome
he got along the X axis.
Only after receiving this information can they infer the complete state of their particles.
To do so, they must use a communication channel, classical communication channel, say a contact through
a radio telescope or whatever kind of classical communication channel that cannot transmit signals faster
than the speed of light.
They must both wait a couple million years for their respective.
Cosmic telephone call, so to speak, to effectively a. and a. correlation of the spin's.
Before that, Alice will not know anything about the expen value of Bob, while Bob will know nothing
about that spin of a particle.
So finally, while it might well be true that something in quantum in the quantum world looks like determining
correlated events among particles instantly, apparently by and faster than light action, this cannot
authorize us to believe that it can be used for faster than light information, transmission and communication.
Correlation does not automatically imply transmission of information.
In this sense, there is no contradiction between quantum mechanics and relativity, relativity is safe
insofar that it imposes the no faster than light transmission of information.
We must distinguish between a super luminal causation and a super luminal information exchange.
The former looks to be commonplace in quantum mechanics, whereas any eventuality of the latter must
be excluded.
The nonlocal character of quantum mechanics is frequently invoked to explain psychic phenomena such
as telepathy.
However, you cannot resort to quantum mechanics to justify faster than light telepathy or mind reading,
at least not quantum mechanics, as it is known in its present formulation, despite so many contrary
claims in the popular media.
Nothing in quantum mechanics allows for that.
If this would.
One day turn out to be the case, another mechanism in our brains must be at work beyond simply an epic
correlation.
In fact, some scientists are doing serious research to determine whether biological processes, quantum
effects may be relevant.
These scientists wonder whether the brain is subjected to quantum phenomenon.
However, you should be aware that at this stage these are still very speculative ideas, which must
be confirmed.
Therefore, if you want any serious physicists to take you seriously, please realize that any statement
connecting quantum mechanics to paranormal phenomenon must be taken with skepticism, or at least great
care and discrimination.